bpo-45680: Clarify documentation on ``GenericAlias`` objects (#29335)
python/cpython: Doc/library/stdtypes.rst

   object: GenericAlias
   pair: Generic; Alias

``GenericAlias`` objects are generally created by
:ref:`subscripting <subscriptions>` a class. They are most often used with

> :ref:`container classes <sequence-types>`, such as :class:`list` or

Reviewer: Container classes can be both sequence and mapping.

Author: Indeed. But the link reference for container classes in general (discussing both sequences and mappings) is `sequence-types`.

Author: This is where the `sequence-types` reference links to https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#emulating-container-types

.. note::

   It is generally only possible to subscript a class if the class implements
   the special method :meth:`~object.__class_getitem__`.

A ``GenericAlias`` object acts as a proxy for a :term:`generic type`,
implementing *parameterized generics*.

For a container class, the
argument(s) supplied to a :ref:`subscription <subscriptions>` of the class may
indicate the type(s) of the elements an object contains. For example,
``set[bytes]`` can be used in type annotations to signify a :class:`set` in
which all the elements are of type :class:`bytes`.

For a class which defines :meth:`~object.__class_getitem__` but is not a
container, the argument(s) supplied to a subscription of the class will often
indicate the return type(s) of one or more methods defined on an object. For
example, :mod:`regular expressions <re>` can be used on both the :class:`str` data
type and the :class:`bytes` data type:

* If ``x = re.search('foo', 'foo')``, ``x`` will be a
  :ref:`re.Match <match-objects>` object where the return values of
  ``x.group(0)`` and ``x[0]`` will both be of type :class:`str`. We can
  represent this kind of object in type annotations with the ``GenericAlias``

>   ``re.Match[str]``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  ``re.Match[str]``.
```

> * If ``y = re.search(b'bar', b'bar')``, however, ``y`` will also be an instance

Reviewer 2: I was a little confused, the `b` eluded me, so maybe this will help
```suggestion
* If ``y = re.search(b'bar', b'bar')``, (note the `b` for :class:`bytes`), ``y`` will also be an instance
```

  of ``re.Match``, but the return values of ``y.group(0)`` and ``y[0]`` will
  both be of type :class:`bytes`. In type annotations, we would represent this

>   subtype of :ref:`re.Match <match-objects>` with ``re.Match[bytes]``.

Reviewer 2: I'm going to be pedantic here: is ``re.Match[bytes]`` really a subtype of ``re.Match[Any]``? I don't remember but I'm inclined to say no.

Author: I _think_ this is the correct terminology. But I'm not 100% sure, and now you mention it, I think it might be confusing wording for people who are new to type theory (sounds a bit too much like "subclass"). Maybe if we used the word "flavour" instead?

Author: Or "variety"?

Reviewer 2: I think we can reuse the terminology in the previous paragraph, variety works good too. Good point about refraining from too much typing terminology in the stdtypes docs.

Also, I thought `re.Match` is invariant, so `re.Match[bytes]` shouldn't be a subtype of `re.Match[Any]`?

Author: Confession: I've never had any formal education in type theory (I did a music degree 😀). I was going off the definition of "subtype" [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subtyping):

> If S is a subtype of T, the subtyping relation is often written S <: T, to mean that any term of type S can be safely used in a context where a term of type T is expected.

mypy [is happy](https://mypy-play.net/?mypy=latest&python=3.10&flags=strict&gist=6090ffeeab4f7b0167f25ae62488761b) with us using `Match[bytes]` in any situation where `Match[Any]` is expected -- and that seems correct, to me?

But regardless, we should use different language here, we agree 😀

Reviewer 2: > Confession: I've never had any formal education in type theory (I did a music degree 😀). I was going off the definition of "subtype" here:

Well same here (not the music degree part though), I have no clue what I'm doing most of the time 😆.

Oh, also, it seems that `typing.Match` is special, it's [generic via `typing.Match[typing.AnyStr]`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/typing.html#typing.Match), so I don't think its variance matters at all and I was probably wrong.

Thanks for the change.

> * If ``y = re.search(b'bar', b'bar')``, (note the ``b`` for :class:`bytes`), ``y`` will also be an instance
>   of ``re.Match``, but the return values of ``y.group(0)`` and ``y[0]`` will
>   both be of type :class:`bytes`. In type annotations, we would represent this
>   variety of :ref:`re.Match <match-objects>` objects with ``re.Match[bytes]``.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If ``y = re.search(b'bar', b'bar')``, (note the ``b`` for :class:`bytes`),
  ``y`` will also be an instance of ``re.Match``, but the return
  values of ``y.group(0)`` and ``y[0]`` will both be of type
  :class:`bytes`. In type annotations, we would represent this
  variety of :ref:`re.Match <match-objects>` objects with ``re.Match[bytes]``.

```

``GenericAlias`` objects are instances of the class

> :class:`types.GenericAlias`, which can also be used to create ``GenericAlias``

Reviewer 2: Off topic: I just noticed it may have been better if we originally named it `types.GenericAliasType`, similar to `types.UnionType`, but it's too late now.

Author: Yeah. Agreed. But, as you say, `¯\_(ツ)_/¯`

   object: GenericAlias
   pair: Generic; Alias

``GenericAlias`` objects are created by subscripting a class (usually a
container), such as ``list[int]``.  They are intended primarily for
``GenericAlias`` objects are generally created by
:ref:`subscripting<subscriptions>` a class. They are most often used with
:ref:`container classes<sequence-types>`, such as :class:`list` or
:class:`dict`. For example, ``list[int]`` is a ``GenericAlias`` object created
by subscripting the :class:`list` class with the argument :class:`int`.
``GenericAlias`` objects are intended primarily for use with
:term:`type annotations <annotation>`.

Usually, the :ref:`subscription <subscriptions>` of container objects calls the
method :meth:`__getitem__` of the object.  However, the subscription of some
containers' classes may call the classmethod :meth:`__class_getitem__` of the
class instead. The classmethod :meth:`__class_getitem__` should return a
``GenericAlias`` object.

.. note::
   If the :meth:`__getitem__` of the class' metaclass is present, it will take
   precedence over the :meth:`__class_getitem__` defined in the class (see

>    :pep:`560` for more details).

Author: This material has been moved to the docs for ``__class_getitem__`` in the data model, per @Fidget-Spinner's suggestion (see #29389)

   object: GenericAlias
   pair: Generic; Alias

``GenericAlias`` objects are generally created by
:ref:`subscripting<subscriptions>` a class. They are most often used with
:ref:`container classes<sequence-types>`, such as :class:`list` or
:class:`dict`. For example, ``list[int]`` is a ``GenericAlias`` object created
by subscripting the :class:`list` class with the argument :class:`int`.
``GenericAlias`` objects are intended primarily for use with
:term:`type annotations <annotation>`.

.. note::

   It is generally only possible to subscript a class if the class implements

>    the special method :meth:`~object.__class_getitem__`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   the special method :meth:`~object.__class_getitem__`.
```

A ``GenericAlias`` object acts as a proxy for a :term:`generic type`,
implementing *parameterized generics*.

> For a container class which implements :meth:`~object.__class_getitem__`, the

Reviewer 2: This part feels a little redundant since we already mentioned the `:meth:`~object.__class_getitem__`` rule above.
```suggestion
For a container class, the
```

argument(s) supplied to a :ref:`subscription<subscriptions>` of the class may
indicate the type(s) of the elements an object contains. For example,
``set[bytes]`` can be used in type annotations to signify a :class:`set` in
which all the elements are of type :class:`bytes`.

For a class which defines :meth:`~object.__class_getitem__` but is not a
container, the argument(s) supplied to a subscription of the class will often

> indicate the return type(s) of one or more methods defined on an object. For
> example, :mod:`regular expressions<re>` can be used on the :class:`str` data
> type and the :class:`bytes` data type:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
indicate the return type(s) of one or more methods defined on an object. For
example, :mod:`regular expressions<re>` can be used on both the :class:`str` data
type and the :class:`bytes` data type:
```

* If ``x = re.search('foo', 'foo')``, ``x`` will be a
  :ref:`re.Match <match-objects>` object where the return values of

>   ``x.group(0)`` and ``x[0]`` will both be of type :class:`str`. We can

Reviewer 2: Side question, I wonder if mypy knows that ``x.group(0)`` is of type `str` if we annotate ``re.Match`` with this syntax. I didn't even know the ``x.group(0)`` form was supported (but I would guess that the ``x[0]`` is).

Author: [It sure does!](https://mypy-play.net/?mypy=latest&python=3.10&gist=aeb545eea714d046b845220be7ae9350)

Reviewer 2: Wow, I'm living in the past. Thanks for digging that out.

   object: GenericAlias
   pair: Generic; Alias

> ``GenericAlias`` objects are generally created by

Author: I changed the wording from "are created by subscripting a class" to "are generally created by subscripting a class". This is because it is certainly possible to directly instantiate a ``GenericAlias`` object through ``types.GenericAlias``, as this documentation states later on.

:ref:`subscripting<subscriptions>` a class. They are most often used with

> container classes (e.g. :class:`list` or :class:`dict`). They are intended

Author: I wanted to link to a definition of the term "container", but it doesn't seem to be in the glossary.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
container classes, such as :class:`list` or :class:`dict`. They are intended
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe a good one would be https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#emulating-container-types.

Reviewer 2: Also I don't suggest writing ``They`` more than once to avoid ambiguity.

In ``They are intended``, a newbie might have no clue what's the ``They`` here refers to. ``GenericAlias`` or container classes? It doesn't hurt to repeat ``GenericAliases`` again.

Author: > Maybe a good one would be https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#emulating-container-types.

That'll do for now!

primarily for use with :term:`type annotations <annotation>`. For example,
``list[int]`` is a ``GenericAlias`` object created by subscripting the
:class:`list` class with the argument :class:`int`.

Usually, the :ref:`subscription <subscriptions>` of an object in Python will
call the :meth:`__getitem__<object.__getitem__>` instance method defined on the
object's class. For example, if we have a list
``food = ['spam', 'eggs', 'bacon']``, calling ``food[0]`` will return the same

> value as calling ``type(food).__getitem__(food, 0)``. However, if a class

Reviewer 2: This example is great, but IMO we should drop it for brevity because it's already covered in the linked `__getitem__` docs.

defines the classmethod :meth:`__class_getitem__<object.__class_getitem__>`,

> then the subscription of that class may instead call the class's implementation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
then the subscription of that class may instead call the class' implementation
```

Author: I think the rule is actually slightly more complex than "never use 's'-apostrophe-'s'". The rule is generally "avoid 's'-apostrophe-'s'" with plural possessives, but not with singular possessives. (https://www.sussex.ac.uk/informatics/punctuation/apostrophe/possessives -- unless Python does something different? 🙂)

Reviewer 3: Right, I learned something new today. Thanks :)

Author: Thanks for taking the time to review!! Appreciate it :)

of ``__class_getitem__``. This should return a ``GenericAlias`` object if it is
properly defined. For example, because the :class:`list` class defines
``__class_getitem__``, calling ``list[str]`` is equivalent to calling
``list.__class_getitem__(str)``, rather than

> ``type(list).__getitem__(list, str)``.

Reviewer 2: Ahh, I see why you talked about ``type(food).__getitem__(food, 0)`` in such detail above. This is a nice parallel and definitely makes things easier to understand. I'd suggest extracting these bits resolving the confusion between ``__getitem__`` and ``__class_getitem__`` and place them in the docs for ``__class_getitem__`` instead https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#object.__class_getitem__ . I certainly found those docs somewhat lacking.

Author: Done!

.. note::
   If :meth:`__getitem__<object.__getitem__>` is defined by a class's
   :term:`metaclass`, it will take precedence over a
   :meth:`__class_getitem__<object.__class_getitem__>` classmethod defined by
   the class. See :pep:`560` for more details.

A ``GenericAlias`` object acts as a proxy for a :term:`generic type`,
implementing *parameterized generics*.

For a container class which implements
:meth:`__class_getitem__<object.__class_getitem__>`, the argument(s) supplied
to a :ref:`subscription<subscriptions>` of the class may indicate the type(s)
of the elements an object contains. For example, ``list[int]`` can be used in
type annotations to signify a :class:`list` in which all the elements are of

> type :class:`int`.

Reviewer 2: This feels slightly naggy. I wonder if there's a way to not repeat the ``list[int]`` example three times for separate reasons.

to a :ref:`subscription<subscriptions>` of the class may indicate the type(s)
of the elements an object contains. For example, ``list[int]`` can be used in
type annotations to signify a :class:`list` in which all the elements are of
type :class:`int`.

For a class which defines :meth:`__class_getitem__<object.__class_getitem__>`
but is not a container, the
argument(s) supplied to a subscription of the class will often indicate the
return type(s) of one or more methods defined on an object. For example,
:mod:`regular expressions<re>` can be used on the :class:`str` data type and
the :class:`bytes` data type. If ``x = re.search('foo', 'foo')``, ``x`` will be
a :ref:`re.Match <match-objects>` object where the return values of
``x.group(0)`` and ``x[0]`` will both be of type :class:`str`. We can represent
this kind of object in type annotations with the ``GenericAlias``
``re.Match[str]``. If ``y = re.search(b'bar', b'bar')``, however, ``y`` will
also be an instance of ``re.Match``, but the return values of ``y.group(0)``
and ``y[0]`` will both be of type :class:`bytes`. In type annotations, we would
represent this subtype of :ref:`re.Match <match-objects>` with

> ``re.Match[bytes]``.

Author: Can anybody think of a better example here? I'm not a massive fan of the example I've used, because it requires some degree of knowledge of regular expressions, which is a corner of Python not everybody knows about. (This paragraph is also longer than I'd like it to be...)

Ideally, I'd like an example that satisfies the following criteria:

1. Is a class that is relatively easy to understand. That rules out ``os.PathLike`` (it's an ABC where the significance of ``__class_getitem__`` is the return value of ``__fspath__``) and ``functools.cached_property`` (don't want to have to explain descriptors!).
2. Is a class that is *obviously* "not a container". That rules out ``queue.Queue``, which feels "kinda like a container even though it technically isn't", and anything from ``collections.abc``. (``collections.abc.Iterable`` is not a container, for example, but I don't want to use an example from ``collections.abc``, as the title of the documentation for ``collections.abc`` is literally "[collections.abc — Abstract Base Classes for Containers](https://docs.python.org/3/library/collections.abc.html)".)

If anybody has any ideas of how to improve this bit, I'd love to hear them!

Reviewer 4: Perhaps `difflib.SequenceMatcher`? The generic specifies the type of item in the sequences it compares. Even if you've not used the module, the name makes fairly obvious roughly what it does.

Otherwise a not as suitable alternative is `concurrent.futures.Future`. The generic specifies the result type contained within, describing it as holding that would possibly suffice. Just not go into detail about what it's used for.

Author: TIL there's a `difflib` module! I think I'll stick with the `re` example for now — I'm happier with it now that the example's been split into bullet points, it feels more manageable — but thanks 🙂

   >>> str(list[int])
   'list[int]'

> The :meth:`~object.__getitem__` method of generic containers will raise an exception to disallow
> mistakes like ``dict[str][str]``::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The :meth:`~object.__getitem__` method of generic containers will raise an
exception to disallow mistakes like ``dict[str][str]``::
```

   dict[str, int]

Standard Generic Classes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The following standard library classes support parameterized generics. This

Author: There was discussion on the previous PR that I opened on how to introduce this list. @ambv suggested "The following standard library data structures [...]" — I've gone for "The following standard library classes [...]" as I think the definition of "class" is probably easier to grok than the definition of "data structure".

* :class:`collections.abc.ValuesView`
* :class:`contextlib.AbstractContextManager`
* :class:`contextlib.AbstractAsyncContextManager`
* :class:`dataclasses.Field`
* :class:`functools.cached_property`
* :class:`functools.partialmethod`
* :class:`os.PathLike`
* :class:`pathlib.Path`
* :class:`pathlib.PurePath`
* :class:`pathlib.PurePosixPath`
* :class:`pathlib.PureWindowsPath`
* :class:`queue.LifoQueue`
* :class:`queue.Queue`
* :class:`queue.PriorityQueue`
* :class:`queue.SimpleQueue`
* :ref:`re.Pattern <re-objects>`
* :ref:`re.Match <match-objects>`
* :class:`shelve.Shelf`
* :class:`types.MappingProxyType`
* :class:`weakref.WeakKeyDictionary`
* :class:`weakref.WeakMethod`
* :class:`weakref.WeakSet`

> * :class:`weakref.WeakValueDictionary`

Author: @Fidget-Spinner, is this list currently in any particular order at all? 🙂 I can think of a few possible orderings that might work:

1. Fully alphabetise the list
2. Go through the modules in alphabetical order, but list classes within each module according to the order they appear in in the module's `__all__`.
3. Something else?

.. seealso::

   :pep:`484` - Type Hints

>       Introducing Python's framework for type annotations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      Introducing Python's framework for type annotations.
```

.. seealso::

   :pep:`484` - Type Hints
      Introducing Python's framework for type annotations.

>    :pep:`585` - "Type Hinting Generics In Standard Collections"

Reviewer 2: Dang, I just realized the quotation marks here are inconsistent with the rest of the docs (they should be removed).
